# NAT-4
Identify Indels in Natera Whole Exome Data

## Methods

The indels pipeline was modified as follows.

It takes as input a pair of matched normal/tumor BAM files.

It extracts from the BAM files all mapping that overlap with an amplicon of the
manifest by at least 20 base pairs. From each such mapping it extracts the
corresponding read and complete it by the amplicon sequence in order the resulting
sequence covers the full amplicon. The assumption underlying this operation is
that the added sequence is not expected to induce an indel call as it will align
perfectly with the amplicon. Then for each such read it creates identical forward
and reverse reads and writes them into FASTQ files. This results in two annotated
FASTQ files similar in format to the ones used in the pipeline usually, with the
addition that the annotation of each read also includes a field specifying the
exact overlap between the original read and the amplicon; this annotation is not
used in the pipeline but could be useful to compute more precisely the VAF of
called variants. Another important point is that reads that overlap two amplicons
will then be duplicated and be associated to both amplicons. The VAF calculation
was also modified in order to account only for reads actually covering the reference
and alternate alleles.

From there, the indels pipeline is used as usual, with the exception that up to 2
mutations are allowed in the primers in order to merge reads.

This pipeline is implemented in the branch `NAT-4` of the indels pipeline github
repo `https://github.com/contextual-genomics/indels-pipeline`.

The reportable thresholds used were the following:
Variants with a VAF below 0.1% or with an alternate coverage < 100 reads or a
coverage < 500 reads were not called. Moreover, to adapt the reportable 
thresholds to the context of a pair of matched tumor/normal samples, any indel 
that appears both in the tumor sample and the normal sample with a normal VAF 
at least 50% of the tumor was not called out.




## Data

The data used are the BAM files generated by our alignment available at
`s3://dnanexus-ch?prefix=altera-pilot-study-canexia/alignments/`.

The directory `data` contains the amplicons manifest
`CG001v5.1_Amplicon_Manifest_Panel5.1.14_20201119.tsv` as well as the expected
variants. For a given tumor sample, all expected indels are in the file
`<SAMPLE>.vcf` while the indels whose position falls within an amplicon of our
manifest are in the file
`<SAMPLE>_CG001v5.1_Amplicon_Manifest_Panel5.1.14_20201119.vcf`.
The set of all expected indels is aggregated in the file `ALL_SAMPLES_expected.vcf`.

## Results

The results are available in the directory `results`. For each sample, this
directory contains an unannotated VCF file of all indels observed in the
alignments generated by the pipeline (files `*_indels_features_unfiltered.vcf`)
and the called indels annotated by snpEFF (files `*indels_filtered_snpeff.vcf`).
The results are in the directory `VAF_01`.

The set of all called indels is in the file `ALL_SAMPLES_predicted_VAF_01.vcf`.
The five expected indels were detected, including the two indels in MSI amplicons 
with a VAF close to the expected VAF in all cases:  

`Sample			Indel			Gene name, 	Expected	Predicted`
`-			-			MSI status	VAF		VAF`  
`C035_0204_012538`	`chr17:7578205:CTA:C`	`TP53`		50.3%		54%  
`C035_0213_012547`	`chr15:90631917:T:TC`	`IDH2`		15%		14.78%  
`C035_0213_012547`	`chr17:56435160:AC:A`	`RNF43:MSI`	30.57%		30.9%  
`C035_0213_012547`	`chr2:148683685:TA:T`	`ACVR2A:MSI`	29.7%		28.27%  
`Natera_Tumor-6`	`chr19:1207076:TG:T`	`STK11`		48.32%		48.03%  

Moroever the indel `chr19:1207076:TG:T` was called in samples `AV017-BIO01-WES01` 
and `AV016-BIO01-WES01` with respective VAF 23.92% and 44.73%. 



